Deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDI Spark Cluster with Notebook Experience (#306)
dotnet/spark: deployment/HDI-Spark/Notebooks/README.md

> Deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDInsight Spark cluster with Notebook Experience

Reviewer: the REPL isn't really a Spark .NET REPL, but a dotnet repl. Is it okay to brand it as a Spark .NET repl ?

Author: Changed

> Deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDInsight Spark cluster with Notebook Experience

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install Spark .NET Interactive Notebook Experiences on your HDInsight Spark Cluster
```

===

# Table of Contents

> This documentation will elaborate the steps on how to deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDI Spark Cluster and submit jobs through Jupyter Notebook using Spark .Net.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This documentation will describe how to use Spark .NET within Jupyter Notebooks available on your HDInsight Spark Clusters.  
```

> This documentation will elaborate the steps on how to deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDI Spark Cluster and submit jobs through Jupyter Notebook using Spark .Net.  

Author: Made changes

- [Background](#background)
- [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)

> - [Steps to deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDInsight Spark cluster](#steps-to-deploy-spark-net-repl-to-hdinsight-spark-cluster)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Installation Procedure](#steps-to-deploy-spark-net-repl-to-hdinsight-spark-cluster)
```

  - [Step 1. Stop Livy Server](#step-1-stop-livy-server)
  - [Step 2. Submit HDInsight Script Action](#step-2-submit-hdinsight-script-action)
  - [Step 3. Start Livy Server](#step-3-start-livy-server)

>    - [Step 4. Set up Spark Default Configs](#step-3-start-livy-server)

Author: Done

- [Submit Jobs through Jupyter Notebook](#submit-jobs-through-jupyter-notebook)

## Background

> We are currently using [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our dotnet REPL. ` dotnet-try ` can be used as a jupyter kernel and we implement it through [livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). To enable Jupyter Notebook Experience using Spark .Net, this will include simple manual steps through [Ambari](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-manage-ambari) and submit [script actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux) on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide the ability to use Spark .NET within your Jupyter Notebooks, an important pre-requisite is a C# REPL that is capable of executing your C# code line-by-line (and preserving execution state, where needed). We have integrated [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official dotnet REPL to provide you with the best experience. 

To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box Spark .NET experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide. Please note that this is *experimental* and not supported by the HDInsight Spark team. *Use it at your own risk*. Please do that we are working hard to get these changes into the respective projects so you do not need these manual steps.

To enable Spark .NET through the Jupyter Notebook Experience, you would have to follow a few manual steps through [Ambari](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-manage-ambari) and submit [script actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux) on HDInsight Spark cluster.
```

# Pre-requisites:

> Create an [Azure HDInsight spark cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-an-hdinsight-spark-cluster) (by visiting the **Azure Portal**, selecting **+ Create a Resource**, and creating a new Azure HDInsight cluster resource), select the **Overview** tab on your cluster. Ensure you've created a cluster with **Spark 2.4** and **HDI 4.0**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create an [Azure HDInsight Spark](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-an-hdinsight-spark-cluster) cluster (by visiting the **[Azure Portal](https;//portal.azure.com)**, selecting **+ Create a Resource**, and creating a new Azure HDInsight cluster resource), select the **Overview** tab on your cluster. Ensure you have created a cluster with **Spark 2.4** and **HDI 4.0**.
```

# Steps to deploy Spark .Net REPL to HDInsight Spark cluster
Open the [Azure portal](https://ms.portal.azure.com/#home). Select **HDInsight Spark cluster** you created in the previous step.

> ## Step 1. Stop Livy Server

Reviewer: Can you make all these manual steps automated by using the Ambari API ?

Author: I though there are some permission issue. @imback82 are we planning to investigate using Ambari APIs or we are good for now?

Reviewer 3: I am fine for now and we can revisit (in a separate PR if needed) unless @suhsteve already has a working solution to share.

Reviewer: Sure we can revisit this if needed.

1.1 From the portal, select **Overview**, and then select **Ambari home**. If prompted, enter the cluster login credentials for the cluster.

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/select-ambari.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

1.2 Select **Spark2**, and then select **LIVY FOR SPARK2 SERVER**.

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/select-livyserver.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

1.3 Select **hn0... host**, stop **Livy for Spark2 Server** if started. When prompted, click **OK** to proceed.

- Select hn0 as shown below.
<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/select-host.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

- Stop Livy for Spark2 Server.
<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/stop-server.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

1.4 Please follow the same step for hn1... host.

## Step 2. Submit HDInsight Script Action
Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left. You'll submit one script action to deploy SparkDotnet REPL on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Submit Script Action on both Head node and Worker node.

> Run `deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh` on the cluster using [HDInsight Script Actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux):

Reviewer: Shouldn't there be steps to download the .sh and upload to a location their cluster has access to ?

Author: Added details in the "Bash script URI" part

* Script type: Custom
* Name: Deploy Sparkdotnet REPL (or anything that is descriptive)

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh` (e.g. https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh)

Reviewer: Your `< >` characters aren't rendering correctly.

Author: Added code to address this

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh` (e.g. https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh` (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/deploy-sparkdotnet-repl.sh`)
```

* Node type(s): Head and Worker
* Parameters: Sparkdotnet version. For example, if you want to install Sparkdotnet version 0.6.0 then it would be `0.6.0`.

The following captures the setting for a HDInsight Script Action on Head node:

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/deploy-sparkdotnet-repl-scriptaction.png" alt="ScriptActionImage" width="500"/>

> After you see green check-marks next to the status of both script actions, you can move to the next step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you see green checkmarks next to the status of both script actions, you can move to the next step.
```

## Step 3. Start Livy Server
Please follow the above [Step 1](#step-1-stop-livy-server) to **Start** Livy for Spark2 Server.

## Step 4. Set up Spark Default Configs
4.1 From the portal, select **Overview**, and then select **Ambari home**. If prompted, enter the cluster login credentials for the cluster.

4.2 Select **Spark2**, and then Select **CONFIGS**, then click on **Custom spark2-defaults**.

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/spark-configs.png" alt="SetConfigsImage" width="800"/>

4.3 Click on **Add Property...** to add Spark default settings.
You will add a total of 4 individual properties. Add them 1 one at a time, all using **TEXT** Property Type in Single property add mode. Make sure you don’t have any extra spaces before or after any of the keys/values.
- Property 1:
    - Key:&ensp;&ensp;`spark.dotnet.shell.command`
    - Value: `/usr/share/dotnet-tools/dotnet-try,kernel-server,--default-kernel,csharp`
- Property 2:
    - Key:&ensp;&ensp;`spark.dotnet.packages`

>     - Value: `["nuget: Microsoft.Spark, 0.5.0", "nuget: Microsoft.Spark.Extensions.Delta, 0.5.0"]`

Reviewer: Do you want to update this version # to 0.6.0 ?

Author: Done

> - Property 3:

Reviewer: This property shouldn't be necessary.

Author: I have deleted this

4.4 Restart affected components.
After adding the new properties, you need to restart components that were affected by the changes. At the top, select **RESTART**, and then **Restart All Affected** from the drop-down.

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/restart-affected.png" alt="SetConfigsImage" width="800"/>

When prompted, select **CONFIRM RESTART ALL** to continue, then click **OK** to finish.

# Submit Jobs through Jupyter Notebook
After finishing previous steps, now you can submit your jobs through Jupyter Notebook!
1. Create a new Spark .NET notebook

[Launch Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, then select **New** > **Spark .Net** to create a notebook.

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/create-sparkdotnet-notebook.png" alt="JupyterNotebookImage" width="800"/>

2. Submit Jobs using Spark .Net

> **Note:** After the kernel is ready, then you can start submitting jobs. The following shows a sample to submit jobs through notebook.
- Start a spark session

> <img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/start-sparksession.png" alt="SubmitSparkJobImage" width="800"/>

Reviewer 2: Change Spark .NET in Jupyter to .NET Spark (C#) to be consistent with Azure Synapse Analytics.

Author: Changed to  .NET Spark (C#) to be consistent with Azure Synapse Analytics.

Install Spark .NET Interactive Notebook Experiences on your HDInsight Spark Cluster
===

# Table of Contents
This documentation will describe how to use Spark .NET within Jupyter Notebooks available on your HDInsight Spark Clusters.
- [Background](#background)
- [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
- [Installation Procedure](#installation-procedure)
  - [Step 1. Stop Livy Server](#step-1-stop-livy-server)
  - [Step 2. Submit HDInsight Script Action](#step-2-submit-hdinsight-script-action)
  - [Step 3. Start Livy Server](#step-3-start-livy-server)
  - [Step 4. Set up Spark Default Configs](#step-3-start-livy-server)
- [Submit Jobs through Jupyter Notebook](#submit-jobs-through-jupyter-notebook)

## Background
To provide the ability to use Spark .NET within your Jupyter Notebooks, an important pre-requisite is a C# REPL that is capable of executing your C# code line-by-line (and preserving execution state, where needed). We have integrated [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official dotnet REPL to provide you with the best experience.

> To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box Spark .NET experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide. Please note that this is *experimental* and not supported by the HDInsight Spark team. *Use it at your own risk*. Please do remember that we are working hard to get these changes into the respective projects so you do not need these manual steps.

Reviewer: I feel the disclaimer should be added at the end of the Background section with something like 

> **Note**: disclaimer

Author: How about the below format?
```suggestion
To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box Spark .NET experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide. 
> **Disclaimer:**: Please note that this is *experimental* and not supported by the HDInsight Spark team. *Use it at your own risk*. Please do remember that we are working hard to get these changes into the respective projects so you do not need these manual steps.

```

Reviewer: Placed after the next paragraph.

Author: Changed

<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/select-livyserver.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

1.3 Select **hn0... host**, stop **Livy for Spark2 Server** if started. When prompted, click **OK** to proceed.

- Select hn0 as shown below.
<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/select-host.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

- Stop Livy for Spark2 Server.
<img src="../../../docs/img/HDI-Spark-Notebooks/stop-server.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

1.4 Please follow the same step for hn1... host.

## Step 2. Submit HDInsight Script Action
Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left. You'll submit one script action to deploy SparkDotnet REPL on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Submit Script Action on both Head node and Worker node.
Run `install-interactive-notebook.sh` on the cluster using [HDInsight Script Actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux):

* Script type: Custom
* Name: Install Sparkdotnet Interactive Notebook Experience (or anything that is descriptive)

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. You can download `install-interactive-notebook.sh` [here](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/deployment/HDI-Spark/install-interactive-notebook.sh), and then upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. You can download [install-interactive-notebook.sh](install-interactive-notebook.sh), and then upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)
```

# Deploy SparkDotnet REPL to HDI Spark Cluster with Notebook Experience

## Goal

This documentation will elaborate the steps on how to deploy SparkDotnet REPL to HDI Spark Cluster and submit jobs through Jupyter Notebook using SparkDotnet.

## Background

We are currently using [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our dotnet REPL. ``` dotnet-try ``` can be used as a jupyter kernel and we implement it through [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic) and livy. To enable Jupyter Notebook Experience using SparkDotnet, this will include simple manual steps through [Ambari](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-manage-ambari) and [script actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux) in HDI Spark Cluster.

## Step

### 1. Go to Ambari, manually stop Livy Server on head node.

> Details to be added.

Reviewer 4: I'll add some comments with the explanation I had written after working with you. Hopefully they help describe some of the details!
***
After creating an Azure HDInsight cluster (by visiting the [Azure Portal](portal.azure.com), + Create a Resource, and creating a new Azure HDInsight cluster resource), go to the Overview tab on your cluster. Ensure you've created a cluster with Spark 2.4 and HDI 4.0.

Go to Ambari by selecting "Ambari home" from your cluster's Overview page. 

Select "Spark2" from the left menu of Services. Next select "LIVY FOR SPARK2 SERVER," select the first head node (i.e. "hn0..."), and locate the "Livy for Spark2 Server" component. Select the three dots under "Action" and click Stop to stop Livy on the head node.

### 2. Run Script Actions on head node and worker node.

> Details to be added.

Reviewer 4: Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select "Script actions" from the options on the left.

You'll submit 2 script actions: one to install Livy Spark Magic, and another to install sparkdotnet.

1) Install Livy Spark Magic
**Script Type:** custom
**Name:** install livy-spark-magic
**Bash script URI**: <uri where the first script is located, i.e.: https://mystorage.blob.core.windows.net/myname/install-livy-sparkmagic-hn.sh>
**Node type(s):** Head

2) Install sparkdotnet
**Script type:** custom
**Name:** install sparkdotnet
**Bash script URI:** <uri where the second script is located, i.e.: https://mystorage.blob.core.windows.net/myname/install-sparkdotnet-wn.sh>
**Node type(s):** Worker

**Note:** The second script action will likely take longer to run than the first.

After you see green check-marks next to the status of both script actions, you can move to the next step.

### 3. Go to Ambari, manually start Livy Server on head node.

> Details to be added.

Reviewer 4: Return to Ambari, and relocate "Livy for Spark2 Server." Select the three dots under Action, and click "Start" to manually start Livy on the head node.

### 4. Ambari -> Spark2 -> CONFIGS, set up Custom spark2-defaults.

> Details to be added.

Reviewer 4: As you did in Step 1, locate Spark2 under the Services on the left menu. At the top of this page, you'll see SUMMARY and CONFIGS. Select CONFIGS, then Custom spark2-defaults, and finally Add Property...

You will add a total of 4 individual properties. Add them 1 one at a time, all using TEXT Property Type in Single property add mode. Make sure you don’t have any extra spaces before or after any of the keys/values.

Property 1:
Key 1: 
spark.dotnet.shell.command

Value 1: 
/usr/share/dotnet-tools/dotnet-try,kernel-server,--default-kernel,csharp

Property 2:
Key 2: 
spark.dotnet.packages

Value 2: 
["nuget: Microsoft.Spark, 0.5.0", "nuget: Microsoft.Spark.Extensions.Delta, 0.5.0"]

Property 3:
Key 3:
spark.dotnet.version

Value 3:
0.5.0

Property 4:
Key 4:
spark.dotnet.interpreter

Value 4: 
try

After adding those 4 properties, select Save. If you see a warning screen of config recommendations, select PROCEED ANYWAY.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Restart Components

After adding the new properties, you need to restart components that were affected by the changes. At the top, select RESTART, and then Restart All Affected from the drop-down. 

```

## Submit Jobs through Jupyter Notebook

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

You can now launch Jupyter notebook from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal. Select Spark .NET as the kernel.

```

Author: Thanks so much for your comments! This is really helpful. I have made the changes. Let me know if you have any feedback.

Reviewer 4: The readme looks great! No problem, so glad I could help out a bit. 😄
